# The-Million-Song-Dataset-MSD-
The second assignment for the DATA420 Scalable Data course has entailed analysing a set of datasets known as the Million Song Dataset (MSD), which originated from a collaboration between The Echo Nest and LabROSA.The homepage of the Million Song Dataset, Welcome! | Million Song Dataset (Bertin-Mahieux, 2011) has offered comprehensive information about the datasets, covering important details like mismatched songs and other relevant facts. Although various datasets were available, this assignment has focused only on two main datasets: the Taste Profile and All Music datasets.

In this assignment, there were three main components. The first part involved exploring the datasets within the Million Song Dataset, examining their sizes, formats, data types, and how each dataset was stored in HDFS. This part also included calculating the number of rows in each dataset and determining all the unique songs in each dataset. These calculations provided a comprehensive understanding of the datasets which were useful in the other two components of the assignment.

The second part involved using one of the feature datasets to investigate audio similarity. This included employing numerical representations of an audio waveform from the audio features dataset to determine the genre of a song. Three types of binary classification models from the spark.ml library was selected and trained to predict the genre. Before training the models, the issue of class imbalance arose, and different resampling techniques were used to address it. In the binary classification section, only the "Electronic" genre was predicted, and the discussion covered the default hyperparameters of each model and the use of cross-validation to fine-tune these hyperparameters. Although hyperparameter tuning could improve model performance, it was not performed due to limited time and resources. After evaluating the binary classification models, a multiclass classification model was used to predict all the genres in the dataset. Resampling techniques were also applied here to address the issue of class imbalance.

The final part of the assignment focused on recommending songs using collaborative filtering with the Taste Profile dataset. Since the distribution plots of song popularity and user activity displayed heavy-tailed (Power Law) distributions, songs with fewer play counts and users with fewer play counts were removed from the original dataset. The Alternating Least Squares (ALS) method in the spark.ml library was then used to train an implicit matrix factorization model. Recommendations were generated using the test dataset, and three types of offline metrics were employed to evaluate the model's performance. This entire process provided significant insights and hands-on experience with machine learning algorithms in the Spark distributed computing framework.

All preprocessing, song genre prediction, and song recommendations were conducted using the Apache Spark distributed computing framework. This involved exploring the allocation of resources, creation of partitions, and task assignments for each stage. Additionally, Python coding, grammar corrections, and other information were supported by ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2024), Stack Overflow (Stack Exchange Inc;, 2024) and QuillBot (QuillBot, 2024).
